Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
from Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, all weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman. This is
Lawrence Ryan announcing the show number
four 64. In this episode,
Scott talks with closure expert,
Karen Meyer about how to get
started with this powerful functional
language. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes, and I'm
talking with Karen Meyer from outpaced
systems. She's a, you studied
physics in college, but you
also were a professional ballet
dancer. So you've got experience
spanning many years in many
disciplines. Thanks for chatting with
me today. Thanks for having
me. You have a book
coming out though that I'm
very excited about called living
closure, and this is going
to be coming out just
in a couple of months,
right? Correct. I'm very excited
too. What was it about
the closure language that, that
made you feel like there
was a book inside you
and you needed to get
it out? Well, I love
closure. I was so happy
when I finally discovered it.
It brought a lot of
joy to my programming and
I wanted to be able
to share that language and
get people into it. But
I noticed around me that
some people were having trouble
getting into the language. We
have a, a user group,
a local user group in
Cincinnati, which is great, but
I hear people sometimes saying
I tried to learn closure
over the weekend and I
had a really hard time
doing it, I guess it's
just not for me. And
it happened at the same
time. I was actually trying
to run a five K
and I've never run before
and I kept trying to
run and I, I think
I would do too much
and end up failing and
just figure, Oh, I just
can't run. And then I
finally came into this program.
I think it was called
ease, ease in the 5k
and actually have a plan
for you that said, Oh,
you don't do it all
on a weekend or you
don't do it all in
two weeks. You just build
up gradually. And that finally
after doing that and not
doing too much too fast,
I was finally able to
run a five K. So
it kind of a bell
went off in my head
saying, Hey, you know what?
Maybe the same approach to
learning language is, is the
same way as you know,
learning to run or learning
anything. The reason I think
that people run into trouble
is they try to do
too much too fast. So
the point of the book
is a, is an introduction,
but it's also to give
a paced training plan. That's
a gradual, What do you
think it is about the
state of programming languages today
that makes people feel like,
you know, if I can't
learn it in 15 minutes,
then, well, forget it. Like
if it's not tweet sized,
if there's entire language grammar,
doesn't fit inside as a
tweet, then I, it's not
for me. I mean, closure's
not C-sharp or Java. It's
not something that you just
figure out in a couple
of hours. Yeah. I think,
well, there's a couple contributing
factors to that, right? I
mean, at first for me,
and for a lot of
people coming from an object
oriented language, like Ruby or
Java or any, or any
other language is different than
functional, it's all about a
different way of thinking. And
that's training your brain fundamentally
to think in a different
way. And I, I don't
think it's really easy to
do that over the course
of a weekend. And the
other factor is just the
pace of change now and
with Twitter and with blogs.
And I love it. I
love the pace of innovation
and technology, but this feels
overwhelming. Sometimes you feel very
pressured to learn the next
thing or learn it fast
as you can cram it
in. This is a, is
it correct to call this
a list? It is, yeah.
Closure is less. So That
mean for people who like,
let's think about who's listening
to this show, like they've
heard the word list. Maybe
they learned it for a
week or two in college
and forgot it. And 20
years has gone by and
they have a sense that,
well, they're smart people and
they know what list is,
but then there's, there's me.
And I, you know, I
drag buttons onto a forum
and I kind of, you
know, I'm, I'm speaking actually
about myself. You know what
I mean? Like I intellectualized
lists, but I always feel
like there's a level of
discourse that's happening around the
concept of lists and a
list that I'm not able
to participate in. Yeah. Well,
I guess lisp is, it
comes from, I think it's
list processing. I forget exactly
the, what it stands for,
but the thing that I
love about it is it's
just such a simple syntax.
And there's so little to
remember, which really suits me.
It's a very regular syntax.
There's lots of prints, but,
and I know people get
scared at that. Like, Oh
my gosh, all the brands,
what am I going to
do? But really when you
get a editor that handles
the prints for you, they
just kind of seem to
disappear and you can actually
move things back and forth
really efficiently. And people have
actually come to think of
the Prinz as hugs for
their code. That Is very
cool. Whenever I think about
Lisbon parentheses, I think about
the classic XKCD number two
97, where they hand the,
you know, the obiwan basically
comes over and hand someone,
a pile of parentheses and
says, these are your father's
princesses elegant weapons for the
more civilized age closure has
been a list. Brother has
been around for forever, you
know, in 1958. And when
you say though, a, a
list that's where I think
things get a little interesting,
cause there's the list proper
noun, but now has become
a generic term for other
people's lists, Right? So there
are different dialects of lists
and like common lists. And
I guess closure is another
dialect and scheme. And to
tell you, quite frankly, I
don't know exactly how they
all differ, but fundamentally they
are all about processing lists
and your code is in
a nested list of lists
and they execute and evaluate
these forms and lists structures.
So at the very core,
it's, it's a very beautiful
structure and I wouldn't get
too hung up in the
different dialects. And that's just
my personal opinion Is your
personal opinion is all of
that, Of, you know, how,
how people can argue that
it's not exactly this sort
of list because it's missing
this exact syntax or whatever.
Some people have said that
they think of closure as
being like an extremely powerful,
they call it a power
language, right? Like if you
were going to pick between
Haskell and closure, they're like,
well, you know, Haskell's great.
There's some things you can
do with it and production,
but if you're really serious,
you want to get some
work done, you go with
closure because it is fully
and completely compiled. And it
runs on the job of
VM. I think there's also
one that runs in the.net
runtime, but it also remains
completely dynamic. It's not an
academic language, but any case
like you're doing real work
and getting real stuff done.
Yeah. I mean, I've been
using it in my day
job for quite a while
and we love it, feel
highly productive in it. We
use it for the backend
for web services for API
APIs, but we also use
it in the front end
and the browser now with
closure script. So this makes
it very compelling that it's,
it's a, I mean, there
is a few different dialect
changes between closure script and
closure closure script is sort
of a subset of closure,
but it allows you to
work in the same language,
basically in the same mindset
in the front end and
in the backend, which is
just lovely, Really so well,
well, everyone is off talking
about things like node and
look how wonderful it is.
I can write JavaScript on
the server and JavaScript on
the client. You are still
doing the exact same thing
except in the language that
speaks more to your soul.
That is amazing. And this
is something that's production ready.
I mean, someone could go
into closure and also closure
script and not feel in
any way that they were
living on the cutting edge
of, you know, like I
don't know about going into
production with Oh yeah. I
mean, it's, it's gotten a
whole lot of traction lately.
So I think it was
on the ThoughtWorks, like adopt
radar for the past couple
years. And I've just noticed
personally, just many, many companies
using it in production. So
if you're a closure developer,
it's a happy time. There's
quite a few jobs out
there now, Someone compared, and
I know that this is
a weird comparison, but they
compare it to closure and
its ecosystem to Python. In
the sense of it has
this, all these tools. There's
so many of them, it's
very straightforward. It's very flexible,
but it'll take you a
long way. You could write
a little script in it
and a little utility, or
you could go and make
a whole distributed cluster in
M in Amazon web services
all with, with closure. I
can't, I can't speak to
the Python ecosystem cause I'm
not, I don't, I'm not
really familiar with it, but
the closure ex ecosystem is
really good. There's many libraries
like AWS, any, anything that
you'd really need. And it
also has the flexibility that
you can on the server
side, use your favorite Java
libraries as well, because it's
got the JVM interrupt and
on the closure strip sky
aside, you can also use
JavaScript libraries as well. So
it's got a lot of
flexibility Is, is the Java
integration and the fact that
it primarily runs on the
JVM, like something that comes
up a lot, like, are
you finding yourself saying like,
this problem is solvable because
of this really great tight
Java integration, like when you
have a sense, like you're
interrupting, like you drop into
Java. Like if you find
a Java class library. Yeah.
Yeah. So it's not all
the time, but, but definitely
it's common. For example, I'm
just thinking of a random
thing, but like generating a
UID, you know, you can
just drop down to the
Java interrupt and say, Hey,
Java, you UID, give me
a new one and you
don't have to write a
closure method to do that.
But there is a closure
library. If you want to
use a closure library that
wraps that and add some
additional functionality to it. You
can use that instead Is,
is closure. What they call
a pure functional language. It
is not a pure functional
programming language in that it
does embrace side effects and
side effects are things like,
you know, writing, writing a
print statement, writing, you know,
doing input now put stuff.
So it's not a pure
functional programming language in that
respect, but it does manage
state and side-effect do things
in a sane fashion. So
yeah, it's, it's uncontrolled, so
it's not spread all over
the place. So is it
fair to say that it
is, it definitely is unquestionably
a functional language. It is
a functional, you know, list
and it is attempting to
do those things that functional
languages do well. Yes, yes.
But it's, it's a practical
language and I think that's
what makes it so good
for just general use because
it, although it doesn't have
the purity of say Haskell,
it does, it is functional
and it does let you
do your job and your
work and Imply that purely
functional languages are like really
cool. And they make you
do nice feminazis sequences, but
when it comes to getting
work done, they, Yeah, that
might be an unfair comparison,
but Indeed, indeed. So in,
in your book, you know,
you go through the structure
of closure and some of
the flow, but you get
right into concurrency really early
on like chapter three. What,
why is that? Is that
because closure's really good at
that or because it's just
a very concurrent time we're
living in It is well,
both, I mean, but closure
that's one of it's, that's
one of its driving points
and that's one of the
things that made me first
explore. It was the ability
to handle concurrency in a
nice way. You know, that,
that sort of thing is
like really hard and Java,
which was the language I
was coming from. So yeah.
Yeah. It's got many different
approaches depending on what you're
looking for, but mutable state
in a general sense is
not something that's spread along
your code in a, in
a spaghetti fashion. So it
allows you to actually handle
concurrency. And your background before
closure was really all Java.
You spent like 15 years,
right? In Java. Yeah. I
did some Java and then
some Ruby as well. And
did you feel like, was
it was the, the, the
language structure of closure that
made it most attractive to
you? Or did you care
that it ran on J
the JVM or not like,
was that helpful in your
decision to kind of switch
from Java to, I think
it was definitely helpful that
it ran on the JVM
and that I could have
the inner op with it,
but the selling point that
really just made me fall
in love with it was
the simplicity of it being
a lisp and also the
interactive nature of development that
you have this rebel, which
is what you work in,
that you can really get
fast feedback and play with
your data structures and almost
sculpt your code as you're
writing it. And if you
pair that with a, you
can use any, a lot
of editor choices, I use
Emacs, but there's Intelijay and
eclipse has plugins, but it
really, So if you would,
if you would, excuse my
ignorance, you're sitting here and
you're writing a closure program.
What kind of things do
you have open? You've got
Emacs open, is that it
you're basically Fullscreen Emacs, and
you just switched between buffers.
Where's your rep. Yeah. So
the rebel is actually in
Emacs. So I use a,
a plugin for Emacs where
you can jackin to your
closure code, which sounds pretty
nice. That sounds pretty awesome.
And matrix. So you jackin,
you get a, a rappel
going and then you can
actually just kind of start
driving through your code. And
a form is kind of
what you call her. An
expression is the, the stuff
in between the prints. So
you can go to the
end of a print and
you can do a keystroke
and it'll just evaluate it.
So you could just, you
know, scroll through your code
and, you know, sort of
interactively evaluate it and port
it over to another buffer
and work with it. And
people call this a rebel
driven development. It's a really
nice way to play with
stuff, get an idea of
where you want to go
with it. And then you
can bring it into a
test or, you know, depending
on what your workflow is
at the time. But One
of the things that happens
in the law, in the
nonfunctional languages that I'm familiar
with is that debugging is
a challenge because there's so
much set up to get
into the function that needs
to do what you want
to do. So it's, you
know, it's like, you know,
start debugging and step steps
to up and make sure
the state is correct. And
then once I get to
this point, now I'm ready.
So you spend less time
actually writing the code and
more time getting the state.
Yeah, exactly. And that's, that's
one of the advantages of
functional programming, right? That you
kind of strive for these
small functions that, you know,
ideally they don't have side
effects. So if you, if
you did run them with
the same inputs are always
going to give you the
same output. So it makes
your code a lot easier
to test. And not only
do you go into concurrency
really quick, you spend an
entire chapter of your book
talking about core.ac. Yeah. That's
a really exciting library. I
really enjoy it. And the
nice thing about that is,
well, let me step back
and tell you a little
bit what, what Cory sink
is. So it allows you
to set up almost like
pipelines. I like to think
of them as like pipelines
of processing and you can
do this asynchronously. So you
can set up these pipelines
and send whatever sort of
processing you want to it.
And you can actually just
like pipe, you can build
them up to other pipes,
But you're doing asynchronous. Like
I understand the idea of
like, you know, you know,
sending this from said to
OC to more et cetera,
and I'm making a pipeline,
but all of that synchronous
when I get it Right.
So you can, you can
make a nice synchronously. And
also the is available on
the server side and an
enclosure script on the front
end as well. So you've
got that nice duality that
you can take the, take
the same tack both on
the server side and the
front end. And the benefit
of that on the browser
side is it gives you
a asynchronous processing on the
browser as well. Oh, wow.
I see. So they've mapped
that asynchronous pipeline model to
winning no promises or whatever,
the thing within JavaScript that
allows you to, you know,
to manage those expectations asynchronously.
So you're doing it in
a familiar way without having
to know idiomatic, JavaScript. Exactly.
Ah, interesting. Okay. Then you,
you get into the power
of macros. Now I know
what macros are from a
CE perspective, how do macros
work in closure? So macros
are a kind of like
a way to do meta
programming, but it allows you
to almost add features to
language. So if you're in
language like Java and you
wanted to add like this
Fu method, you've always wanted
this Fu method and to
actually get that added. And
then the language yourself you'd
have to send up a
change requests to, I dunno,
who, and then years later,
maybe, maybe it would get
into language, but you can
do this fairly easily yourself
with closure, with a macro.
And you can just add
your, your Fu that you
wanted to call and it
would be there for you.
So it makes DSLs domain
specific languages really easy. I
see. So it's kind of
like, I'm thinking about like
extension methods on the dotnet
CLR, where it's like, you
know, strings should really all
have this. I can't believe
they didn't do that. Like
why that's unacceptable or, or
monkey patching and Ruby. So
is this because the, the,
the atoms, the pieces, the,
the individual available methods that
you have enclosure are so
basic, like you have like,
if, and you have do,
but there's no win. So
if you need a win,
you know, you have to
make that yourself. So then
that becomes a macro, right?
Exactly. What is the difference
between a macro and a
helper function? So it's kinda
gets, gets a little bit
hairy, trying to look at
the difference of them, but
so some things that like
a macro could do that
help her function. Oh, let
me, let me, let me
just say this, that if
you can use a helper
function and on a macro,
you should always go with,
Oh, really? Why is that?
Because macros get complicated. They're
not easy to write, you
know, being a meta way
of meta programming. So if
you can do something the
simpler way first, you definitely
do this, but some things
you just cannot use a
helper function for, for example,
if you wanted to make
a new way, that would
define a function. Oh, okay.
So you're changing fundamentally the
language structure and how yeah.
Yeah. Or if you wanted
to have, you know, something
that you always wanted to
add to defin To define
a C diff Find a
function, that's something that you
could couldn't do with a
regular function. So you'd have
to use a macro to
do that. I says you
can actually take over techniques
and take over keywords within
closure and change things fundamentally.
Oh, okay. Interesting. So, so
macros are these combinations of
primitive, you know, forms that
are built in, but not
necessarily interchangeable with a helper
function. But so it sounds
like it's almost like taking
the safety off the gun
at that point. Like once
you're, once you've made it
that far into the book,
you're probably pretty good. Yeah.
Okay. Now you say that
you're writing web apps, like
what's the closure on rails,
what's the web framework. So
it's a little bit different
closure as a, as a
language and an ecosystem doesn't
really like frameworks. So we
prefer kind of collections of
libraries instead. So there isn't
really a killer app like
rails or anything like that.
So you'll see very there
there's foundation libraries that kind
of everybody uses, or most
people use this ring is
a library for doing web
servers. And that's one that
you'll see a lot in
the wild, but there are
also some libraries that combine
other libraries that people put
together to hack actually have
some more batteries included. So
you don't have to have
a real pair down
It seems like in the
research that I did that,
even if you go searching
around for closure web framework,
and this is again, Googling
and ignorance, which is what
I do very well, you
know, I'll say, well, look,
here it is, here's one
called luminous, right? This is,
this is the solution. And
then I get in there
and it immediately says, we're
a micro framework and we're
based on a set of
lightweight library. So basically it's
just someone drew a dotted
line around some useful methods
and functions and said, yeah,
let's give that a name
that's useful for people to
start with. And it's like,
well, wait a second. This
isn't the, the DHH level
opinion. Like, you're not ordering
me how to do things.
This is just a collection
of useful things. It's very,
it's very kind of laissez
Faire is the community like
that. Just very micro framework.
Yeah, definitely, definitely prefer libraries
over frameworks. It's even better
when these libraries are composable.
Just like kind of keep
it simple, keep it composable,
keep it light. That's really
kind of the, the closure
ecosystem philosophy. Yeah. When I
went looking around on GitHub
for different closure libraries, and
by the way, you all
have some of the best
cool names. Like there's one
called composure, but again, the
J is pronounced like an
ass. I think it's just,
it's so cool. Like when
you have a really awesome
name and everyone in the
community goes for it entirely,
and you started poking around
and it's like, it's four,
it's four files, you know,
when a couple of K
each. So this is the
thing about it. It kind
of speaks to the, the,
the purity and the pragmatism
of the language purity in
the sense of, you know,
here's the least viable thing
I needed to be useful.
And, you know, I made
it as clear and concise
as possible, and I wish
you all the best with
it. Very true. That is
great. Have you built up
your own libraries and within
your company or a open
source thing? Yeah, we are.
I, we are looking at
open sourcing a couple where
I think we have to
get it more in a
actually I think we have,
I'm trying to, I don't
have to bring it up,
but I think we do
actually open source a couple,
but the name names of
them are escaping right now.
And we're open source a
couple more. I've worked on
a couple libraries myself, just
for fun. One of them
was for the AR Duran
called CLJ drown. So, Yeah.
So just to make sure
that people heard that you
made a drone, a library
for it, you said an
AR drone. Yeah. The augmented
reality. Is that what Yeah,
it does. It sounds for
augmented reality. It's a quad
copter. So that was kind
of my first closure library,
just kind of learning language
and playing with it. And
that was a lot of
fun. Being able to be
in a Rupal and having
a quad copter take off
so that if you want
to play around with quad
copters enclosure, that's a fun
place. And that is actually
your most popular. Isn't that
funny how that works? That's
your most popular GitHub repository?
There's like almost 200 stars.
People like quad copter enclosure.
That's awesome. It's pretty fun
that you did a, a,
a cool talk a couple
of years ago about Alice
in Wonderland as it relates
to closure. Can you talk
about that? Yeah. So I'm
sure if you've heard these,
if you've gotten into functional
programming, then you start hearing
new vocabulary that you haven't
heard before. And one of
the words that I heard
when I got into functional
programming was monad and I
had no idea what this
was and what people were
talking about. And I took
the approach of, Oh, I'll
just sit down during lunch
a couple of days and
I'll, I'll figure it all
out. And I still had
no clue. I have to
say, I think I knew
it once, but then it
escaped me. Yeah. They're like
that you, you, you figure
it out and then it
just goes away. But, so
I decided to take a
more, a more hard approach
of trying to learn it
and in studying papers and
really kind of apply myself,
trying to learn it. I
found maybe the best way
of trying to explain it
to myself and to other
people was in the context
of a story. So I'm
a big proponent of storytelling
as a way of teaching.
And sometimes if you've got
kind of a scary concept,
like monad, your brain kind
of goes into anxiety, like,
Oh my gosh, how am
I gonna learn this? But
if you put it in
the context of a story
and an adventure of someone
else doing it, you can
actually problem solve and learn
things a little bit better.
So that's what that talk
did that kind of took
an Alice in Wonderland approach
to learning what monads were.
Can you give me a
short explanation so that someone
might leave this podcast? Not
only with a good understanding
of closure, which I think
you've done, but also they
could tell someone at work
what a monad is, or
is it something that takes
another half an hour? Well,
th th the thing about
monads are, they're almost very
Zen. Exactly. Yes, it is
That you probably already know
them and you probably already
implemented them, but you, you
won't realize that you have
until you see the pattern
a few times. So it's
not really something that you
can describe in words so
much, you kind of just
have to see them code
done like three or four
times. And you're like, Oh,
I totally have done that.
That is extremely mr. Miyagi
kind of like hand in
hand. I don't know what
you're saying, mr. Miyagi, please
help me. Fantastic. So the,
okay, so the language is
in as a list, it
runs on the JVM. It
is functional, but practical the
community, it sounds like they're
very welcoming community. Yes they
are. And in fact, that
was one of the reasons
I got involved in the
community. I wanted to get
involved with an open source
project. And at the time
there was a group trying
to make this a website
called foreclosure that I got
hooked up with. And it's
actually a four. And then
it's closure. It's something to
do with like foreclosure poems,
but it's a wonderful site.
So if you're, if you're
interested in getting into closure,
you can actually try little
bite sized, fill in the
blank, solve this closure problem.
And it's very addictive though.
I have to warn you.
Like people have said that
stayed up for nights, trying
to really, yes. So beware
as you're as you're going
there, but it's a fantastic
site. And it was a
fantastic first opensource project to
get involved in as well.
And that's at the number
four closure.com and there's a
whole problem list. And it
goes from elementary all the
way up. It's almost like
the, Oh, shoot. What, what,
what, what are the, I
feel bad. I'm on my
own podcast. And I'm blanking.
What is the, the, the
coding problems that you it's
oiler, right? E U L
E R the other project.
Am I pronounced project Euler?
Yeah. I think I'm pronouncing
that right. It does have
some of those problems in
there as well, but it
takes more of like a
cone approach of your co
K O N. So it's
sort of the fill in
the blank, small little bite
sized problem. I see. It's,
it's, it's caught us Katas
yeah, because they're a little
bit bigger, I think, but
yeah, so, but they're like
small, So this is great.
Now I have to go
figure out how katas and
koans and haikus and, and
all of this fits in.
And what a monad is.
People can also go to
tri C L j.com and
they can just type this
right in their browser. And
they can learn that if
I last question, if I
decide to go and do
something enclosure, but I'm not
a closure shop in our
company, hasn't bought into it.
You know, what's the kind
of work or processing or
bite-sized thing that I could
maybe start with to introduce
this into a company. Well,
I mean, tests are always
good way to introduce a
new language into a company
and kind of have risk-free
fashion. So you can start
writing some of your tests
and closure and gain experience
with it. And then as
your team kind of ramps
up with it, then you
could start using it for
more things. I see. That's
a good idea. So if
I'm a Java shop already,
or even if I have
a.net shop, cause they're, I
believe is a full version
of closure for.net, then just
bring in the extra, you
know, the little bit of
overhead the closure has as
far as libraries and compilers
and don't change my existing
code. That's correct. That is
a great idea. And then
if everyone starts to love
it, it's the idea of
virus that changes the whole
company. Exactly. So when is
your book coming out and
who is it with? It's
with a Riley and it's
coming out in a couple
months. I believe if everything
works with the production stuff.
So that is in April
And O'Reilly books have an
animal on the cover, which
is the animal we should
be looking for. Mine is
a water rail It's as
a bird with a very
long beak. Yeah. Very cool.
Well, thank you so much,
Karen Meyer. Well, thank you. So
Karen's book is living closure
and we'll put a link
to that in the show
notes. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.
.